Additional details to the Instrumentation guide (#3309)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/concepts/instrumentation/libraries.md

libraries follow conventions, many scenarios may be enabled out of the box
without the user's input or configuration.

Semantic conventions are always evolving and new ones are constantly added. If
some don't exist for your library, then please consider adding them. Pay special
attention to span names; strive to use meaningful names and consider cardinality

> when defining them.

Author: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/3309/commits/b67d0c0962f7253d1596b392d6d2e3d0760a36f1

There is a `schema_url` attribute that can be used to record what version of the

> semantic conventions are being used. Please set this attribute, when possible.

Author: c1577bc652a0de38e77188fe1e3517cbbd80f601

If you have any feedback or want to add a new convention - please come and
contribute!
[Instrumentation Slack](https://cloud-native.slack.com/archives/C01QZFGMLQ7) or
[Specification repository](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification)
are a good places to start!

### Defining spans

Think of your library from the perspective of a library user and what the user
might be interested in knowing about the behavior and activity of the library.
As the library maintainer, you know the internals but the user will most likely
be less interested in the inner-workings of the library and more interested in
the functionality of their application. Think about what information can be
helpful in analyzing the usage of your library, then think about an appropriate
way to model that data. Some things to consider are:

- Spans and span hierarchies
- Numerical attributes on spans (as an alternative to aggregated metrics)
- Span events

> - Aggregated Metrics

Author: 973cb2961efc954d65f6eea96e3ae69f9b8f331d

The rest of this document gives guidance on what and how to instrument if you
decide to do it.

## Personally Identifiable Information (PII)

In some semantic conventions, the data collected as a span attribute could
contain PII (Personally Identifiable Information). As a general guideline, do
**not** collect this data by default. A few other options for handling this data

> are:

Reviewer: > * Depending on your local laws make sure you work with your companies legal specalists, to verify that you are legally allowed to collect it.

These guidelines are for library authors, right? So, the instrumented software is intended to be used by others. In that case `local laws` do not depend on the location of the library author but the users of the users. That's why I find this specific bullet point problematic. Usually, library authors would not know / control who and where the library is being used.

> are:

Reviewer 2: That's a good point, @AlexanderWert, this makes me even wonder if this section about PII should live somewhere else and we link to it from the Library Guidelines with some specific words for library authors (either don't collect PII (preferred) or make sure that users of your library have full control what they collect and what not)

- Don't collect it at all
- Provide opt-in features to collect potentially PII for users who need it

> - Collect it but with a configuration option to obfuscate / redact the PII, if
>   you’re confident about being able to implement the obfuscation / redaction
>   effectively and with little overhead

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Collect it but obfuscate / redact the PII, if
  you’re confident about being able to implement the obfuscation / redaction
  effectively, non-reversible and with little overhead
```

PII is data like email addresses, passwords, usernames, custom data in database
queries, etc. For example, this is a Elasticsearch query with PII redacted that
would be a span's `db.statement` attribute:

```json
{ "query": { "match": { "username": "REDACTED" } } }

> ```

Reviewer 3: Just ran across this PR and curious about this comment.  Is the idea that we don't want instrumentation to obfuscate PII, but instead want it done in otelcol?

> ```

Reviewer 4: @cheempz not necessarily. Lots of people don't use the collector, or they have requirements that nothing sensitive ever leaves a network boundary, even if those boundaries are still internal.

> ```

Reviewer 3: OK yes that was my understanding too, thanks for clarifying.

> ```

Author: @svrnm I think it's common to obfuscate the PII in the instrumentation so it's never sent over the network. It therefore might be worth showing an example of obfuscating the PII in this instrumentation guide, instead of showing an example with the collector. What do you think?

> ```

Reviewer 2: I would also prefer showing examples of treating PII in the instrumentation, but the problem we have here is not the content but the presentation: We support 11 languages, so you would need to provide 11 examples (in tabs) eventually. The right place to have that is the language-specific doc sections and link out to that. The collector is often a good choice to provide some "middle-ground"

So here's a proposal (please discuss) what we can do instead:
* Provide a list of example redactions & obfuscations in a table, e.g. IP addresses (192.168.0.17 -> 192.168.x.x, or "username" to "REDACTED", or credit card number "4860926956060625" to "Visa"). Again this should be noted as "suggestions" and that people need to be cautious around local laws and making sure that what they do is "safe" (what ever that means in that context)
* Verbally mention that you can do this either in the language specific instrumentation (link to the concept page for instrumentation for now, we **later** can add that to the language specific docs and link to them) and the collector (link to the transformation page)
* Probably it is also worth mentioning that there is some mechanism in Automatic Instrumentation to help you with that (if I remember correctly there is some SQL parameter redaction capabilities in some languages)

The rest of this document gives guidance on what and how to instrument if you
decide to do it.

> ## Personally Identifiable Information (PII)
> 
> In some semantic conventions, the data collected as a span attribute could
> contain PII (Personally Identifiable Information). As a general guideline, do
> **not** collect this data by default. A few other options for handling this data
> are:
> 
> - Provide opt-in features to collect potentially PII for users who need it
> - Collect it but obfuscate / redact the PII, if
>   you’re confident about being able to implement the obfuscation / redaction
>   effectively, non-reversible and with little overhead
> 
> PII is data like email addresses, passwords, usernames, custom data in database
> queries, etc. For example, this is a Elasticsearch query with PII redacted that
> would be a span's `db.statement` attribute:
> 
> ```json
> { "query": { "match": { "username": "REDACTED" } } }
> ```
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

@estolfo it looks like the PII discussion will take a little bit longer, this should not stop us from merging your other changes into the page. I argue that we should move this into a separate (follow-up) PR for discussion and merge the other work already. wdyt? 

Let me add, that I highly appreciate your efforts to dig into PII and to provide some documentation around it. This is a _really_ tough topic, but one we should definitely address in our documentation. Thank you!!

Author: Hi @svrnm Thanks for your review and suggestions. No problem to come back to the PII discussion in a separate PR.
